# The Real Value of OOP

There is one thing that OOP does do better. It makes it easier to make a program with bad structure that still somehow works. The class becomes a big bag of data in which methods can put any kind of information when the programmer doesn't know where it should go. Probably because they work in a big team with bad communication and barely any real planning or structure. It directly addresses the organizational problems of commercial software companies and lets them ship working code. Who cares if it's slow and buggy and unmaintainable? We can deal with it, we have enough people. That might not be a bad thing. But please remember that the only good argument for OOP is that it enables big companies with crappy methods and expendable programmers to stay in business. There is no argument for OOP in regards to code quality.

The pitfalls are essential features of OOP, and it deliberately pushes the programmer to use them. They are cheap hacks, and if you use enough of them, you have a program that works. Expert programmers can even debug and maybe understand them. Less experienced programmers might get stuck when implementing more elegant solutions, so the ability to do lots of low-skill work that still makes you feel accomplished is very important in keeping employee motivation up. The extra work that OOP creates also helps with managing employee motivation and schedules. It also gives jobs to consultants and people who want to seem smart and get called "software architect". Of course, it's all bullshit, mind games and busywork, but what matters is that it works.

It's totally fine if you just want to make money writing software, and have to use OOP and want to push it to the limit. I am in the exact same situation. But please don't start thinking that it's actually a good way to design software. It's designed to limit the effects of bad programmers and development processes, and there are a lot better ways to create maintainable and extendable software.﻿
