# The Psychology of Object Oriented Programming

Some tools are easier to misuse. People with bad habits or a bad working environment are usually desperate for quick fixes, and lots of easily misused tools are promoted by those who prey on bad programmers. They might even be forced or encouraged to use the tools by "caring" "forward-thinking" managers. And when it doesn't work, the programmers are scammed with even more fake solutions and book recommendations. The kids go for that stuff like cotton candy, because they think they are finally starting to understand things and feel confident. This still takes a long time and locks them into one way of doing things, which they will protect because they don't wanna feel extremely stupid and gullible, and because it's the only thing they know how to turn into money and material security. And that is Stockholm Syndrome and Indoctrination 101. It doesn't seem like it was this bad 20 years ago, so people who learned OOP before that probably have no idea that this is going on.

Most people who get indoctrinated and then slowly lose the sense of wonder will still keep protecting the perpertrator based on past emotions and insecurities. A lucky few will be able to distance themselves and call it "just an experience" or "just a tool". Very few are actually able to think about and refactor their understanding, because all the insecurities and past trauma will resurface, especially in the context of another programmer with a slightly pretentious tone telling you that you've been completely wrong most of your professional career. Those arguments with other programmers really messed up their ability to understand their work.

Meanwhile, some people are lucky enough to be able to question their core assumptions without emotions messing everything up. Some are also lucky enough to detect deliberate or accidental bullshit from afar, and avoid those easily misused tools. There are both beginners and experts, old and young, developers and managers, in both the believer and disbeliever camp. I'm not gonna blame anyone, except the generators of the deliberate or accidental bullshit. I have a lot of very secure emotions towards those people.